There's two other issues with CrossFit
that are out of this solar system.
Stupid.
[Music]
Hi, my name is John Jakewish. I'm a
doctor of biomedical engineering which
gives me a unique perspective uh to
comment on all sorts of things. Today
I'm going to talk about a controversial
subject uh which probably is less
controversial than it was 3 or 4 years
ago. Uh I want to talk about CrossFit
and why you
really want to avoid CrossFit. If uh
depending on your goals, however, if
your goal is competing at the CrossFit
games, you kind of have to do CrossFit.
So, I want to I want to just unwind and
look at some of the little aspects of
CrossFit that tend to be problematic on
a very basic level. Now, there's a lot
of different things going on in CrossFit
in the promise of CrossFit
in especially in the beginning was
you're going to take an athlete and
they're going to be well-rounded. So the
idea that oh you don't want to be like a
bodybuilder because all they can do is
lift heavy stuff
but they can't run. No, that's their
assertion and also it's not true. But
that's just what they said. I've met a
lot of bodybuilders that can sprint
incredibly fast. I've not met a lot of
bodybuilders that can run marathons.
There's a lot of reasons for that.
mostly because when you have blood
pumping to that amount of musculature,
you're you're going to compromise your
endurance. So, the idea
of having a well-rounded athlete that
can run distances, also run sprints,
also lift heavy weights, also do
explosive calisthenics, also do
explosive high repetition powerlifting
moves.
you're going in so many different
directions
from the perspective of adaptations of
the body that you're actually not going
to improve much because a lot of these
stimuli are conflicting with each other.
So, like for example, if you take an
individual and they're doing strength
training, like the kind of things that
we talk about on this channel all the
time, you can build an amazing physique,
but then as soon as you go out and start
running distance, your So, your your
weight training is upregulating
testosterone and growth hormone. When
you start running, you're downregulating
testosterone and growth hormone and
upregulating cortisol. So cortisol, a
lot of people don't know this, but it
really has two functions. It's a stress
hormone, and it's not a bad hormone.
That this is one thing that I constantly
bump into. A lot of people think
cortisol is bad. No, cortisol is your
body's way of stopping you from doing
something that is, you know, maybe not
not optimal, but it's also not bad. Like
for example, when you get up out of bed
in the morning, cortisol goes up. It
doesn't mean getting out of bed is bad
for you. It means that it's a stress.
And when the cortisol level goes down
after that, well then it's not a stress
and it didn't impede your physical
development, brain function, whatever.
So there's a lot of confusion on that
topic. But when you look at this
CrossFit dynamic,
really most of the stuff that they're
doing cancels out a lot of other stuff
that they're doing. So from the
rudimentary
principles,
it doesn't work. I mean, which is why
the only way you can tell somebody does
CrossFit is they'll probably mention it
five times in the first conversation you
have with them because there's no way to
tell that they work out by looking at
them. I mean, that's a little bit of a
joke and bodybuilders say that joke all
the time. Uh, but there's a lot of truth
to it, too. Uh not not a not a lot of
people have really built much of an
impressive physique from CrossFit. And I
know somebody will be like, "What about
some guy and what about some other guy
who won the CrossFit games?" Yeah, they
all built their bodies doing something
else. At least as far as I can tell. And
if you want to give me examples and uh
you know, argue with me, you can do
that. I probably won't look them up
because I don't really care. It's just
dumb. Now, here is the that there's two
other issues with CrossFit that are
like out of this solar system stupid.
Number one is powerlifting movements
outside of one repetition. So, when you
go to a powerlifting meet, somebody's
doing or or an Olympic weightlifting
meet, which is different lifts, they do
one repetition. Now, the reason they do
one repetition is these movements are
highly technical,
very difficult to pull off, and a lot of
things are going on. They're multi-jint.
You have to be able to balance the
weight through your feet, getting the
load in the right part of your feet at
the right moment to complete the
movement. So, each one of these
movements is as complicated as a golf
swing. remember golf swing.
Now imagine somebody has you instead of
practicing a high quality golf swing.
They're going to have you do 50 golf
swings in two minutes.
Do you think you're going to your 50
golf swings are going to look good if
you do that? Or are you going to break
form to try and match the speed that
you're being asked to perform these?
Well, of course, you're going to break
form
to perform
these movements under the time. And when
you break form and you're twisting your
back, it's just a recipe for disaster.
You're going to get injured. When
CrossFit became popular in the United
Kingdom, uh I was doing research over
there at the time on my my series of
medical devices that are found at osteo
clinics. I talked to some physicians in
the United Kingdom and there's there's
an article I'll put up, but they were
telling me the same stuff that's in
there. They had seen hip reconstruction
surgeries.
the need for those had gone up 600%
with the British population since the
introduction of CrossFit. And I said,
"So, is are CrossFitters just
encouraging people to do terrible things
or is this just all happening at
CrossFit gyms?" The physicians, the they
were orthopedic surgeons, they said this
is all happening at CrossFit gyms. So,
highly technical movements that are
designed for one repetition, you really
don't want to do like 50 of those in a
row or two of those in a row. You want
to get them right if that's what you're
doing and that's your sport and
perfect the one repetition. Because the
idea of perfecting the one repetition
has to do with recruiting more muscle
and using momentum to pull off a a
bigger lift.
Another example, which I talk about a
little bit in some of the Westside
barbell video programming that we have
with our with our program that we built
with Westside Barbell with Olympic
weightlifting. Bracing is a thing. So
like you want to get the bar over your
head and your elbows locked so that it's
the bone that is receiving the load, not
the musculature. You want the least
amount of exposure
to the musculature of this load so that
you can pull it off because it's such a
high level of weight. And all of that
form and technique and concentration is
just thrown in the trash with CrossFit
and and you're encouraged to do it uh in
I I would say an irresponsible manner.
Now,
all the stuff I just said, it's not
necessarily true of all CrossFit
instruction because I know guys who own
CrossFit gyms who don't let you do the
high repetition
stuff. They they treat it more like,
okay, today we're doing Olympic lifting.
Today we're doing powerlifting. Today
we're doing sprints. Today we're doing
some distance stuff. So they're trying
to apply it in a way where they're
adhering to the rules of all the sports,
not for the sake of following the rules,
for the sake of safety of the athlete.
So if you want to do CrossFit in the the
group fitness experience seems fun, uh
which yeah, I mean, I've I've done I've
done a couple CrossFit classes. I I sat
a couple things out because I was just
like I'm just not stupid. Uh so I'm not
going to do that. But I understand the
group dynamic. It was fun. It's fun
doing this with other people. You get
more motivated by seeing other people do
it. Sometimes somebody breaks your
record and you find a new place for
motivation because you're like, "Oh, I'm
not letting that guy beat me." So,
that's all great, but you have to
consider all the negative things that I
mentioned. And this is also just why
CrossFit's
not really popular anymore. Hope this
helped. And um if anything I said made
you upset because you're a CrossFit
zealot and uh you mention CrossFit five
times with every new person you meet,
definitely say something in the
comments. I mean, I'm not I'm not going
to make fun of you because at this
point, you're just a diehard and uh
that's cool, too, but I don't want you
to get injured. So, you need to take the
advice that I gave towards the end of
this video, which is start doing it one
rep at a time. throw that stopwatch away
and just get the movements right.
Getting the movements right is
important. Doing it under time is not
only not important, it's beyond dumb. I
hope this helped and like I said, give
me a comment and a thumbs up. Thanks. If
this video helped you, I want you to
subscribe and follow. I'm going to put
out videos on a regular basis. I think
they're going to help a whole lot of
people, especially if you're one of
those people that doesn't just instantly
grow from lifting regular weights. We've
got the answer for you.